
# Aritificial Intelligence Project
## A Study of Search Algorithms and Heuristics Functions: 
## Iterative Deepening A Star and Recursive Best First Search,Manhattan Distance and Walking Distance
&nbsp;

### Problem Description

15 Puzzle with IDA*, RBFS, Manhattan Distance, Walking Distance

In this assignment you will implement and compare two memory-bounded heuristic search algorithms, IDA* and RBFS, and experiment with heuristics for 15-puzzle (8-puzzle generalized to 4 X 4 board). Fix the goal configuration to be the one on the right. The problem is to take any configuration of the puzzle, the initial state, to the goal configuration with a sequence of moves in the smallest number of steps. For example, the following problem is solvable.
```
1  5  9  13      1  2  3  4
2  6  10 14  =>  5  6  7  8
3  7  11 15      9  10 11 12 
4  8  12         13 14 15 
```
Implement and experiment with the following heuristic functions.

MD: Manhattan distance (see pp. 105 for 8 puzzle).

MY: Any other heuristic (>= MD) that you can come up with that performs better in terms of the number of nodes searched by one or both of the algorithms. This heuristic may or may not be admissible.

To study how the amount of search varies with the problem difficulty, we will generate random problems by perturbing the goal state with a random sequence of moves. Define Scramble(m) to be the distribution of problems generated by applying a random m-move sequence to the goal state.  
```
      For m= 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 do  
        For n=10 random problems p generated by Scramble(m) 
          For the two algorithms A
	    For each heuristic function h, 
		Solve p using A and h 
	        Record the length of the solution found, the number of nodes 
	               searched, and the total CPU time spent on evaluating
                       the heuristic and on solving the whole problem. 
```		       
For each m, plot the average time consumed, nodes searched, and the optimal solution lengths for the 2 algorithms and the 2 heuristics. You might that your algorithm is taking too long for some inputs and heuristics. It is ok to bound the time and/or the number of nodes searched to a maximum and report what fraction of the problems are solved. Report the other statistics on the solved problems.

For the report, follow the same format you used for the first programming assignment. Your report should look like a research paper with abstract, introduction (a summary of the goals and results), experimental setup, result tables and plots, and the discussion. You should include answers to following questions in your discussion of results. Please feel free to add any other important observations.

1. Is there a clear preference ordering among the heuristics you tested considering the number of nodes searched and the total CPU time taken to solve the problems for the two algorithms?

2. Can a small sacrifice in optimality give a large reduction in the number of nodes expanded? What about CPU time?

3. Is the time spent on evaluating the heuristic a significant fraction of the total problem-solving time for any heuristic and algorithm you tested?

4. How did you come up with your heuristic evaluation function?

5. How do the two algorithms compare in the amount of search involved and the cpu-time?

Note that it is very important for this assignment to write efficient code.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

## The Experiment Results:
### Abstract
In this experiment, we implemented and compared two memory-bounded heuristic search algorithms, IDA* and RBFS for the 15-puzzle problem. In addition, we also implemented the Manhattan distance and the walking distance heuristic functions to see the performance of heuristics regarding to node expansion and their effects of the algorithm performance. As the result, we found that the node search and CPU-time can be the important factors to determine the performance of heuristic function and algorithm.
- For the detail, Please see the [report](https://github.com/csdankim/15_Puzzle/blob/master/PA2_15_puzzle.pdf).
&nbsp;

### Code
- [IDA.py](https://github.com/csdankim/15_Puzzle/blob/master/IDA.py)
- [main.py](https://github.com/csdankim/15_Puzzle/blob/master/main.py)
- [RBFS.py](https://github.com/csdankim/15_Puzzle/blob/master/RBFS.py)
